## Specs

```
parammodes opcode, pos1, pos2, outPos
# spaces are a lie
# all arguments are integers
# outPos is a position that is modified
```

### Opcodes

two decimal digits.

| opcode | instruction | signature                                 |
| ------ | ----------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 01     | add         | a1, a2 -> a3                              |
| 02     | multiply    | a1, a2 -> a3                              |
| 03     | save intput | _ -> a1                                   |
| 04     | output      | a1 -> _                                   |
| 05     | jnz         | conditional, target-pc -> _               |
| 06     | jz          | conditional, target-pc -> _               |
| 07     | less than   | smaller, larger -> 1 if true else 0 in a3 |
| 08     | equals      | a1, a2 -> 1 if true else 0 in a3          |
| 99     | exit        | _ -> _                                    |

### Parammodes

| code | mode                                      |
| ---- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 0    | argument is a pointer to a position       |
| 1    | argument is an immediate signed int value |

Leading zeros can be skipped. So read it right-to-left.

Rightmost digit of parmmode is mode of first argument.

Parameters that an instruction writes to will *never be in immediate mode*.

### Pitfalls

Normally, after an instruction is finished, the instruction pointer increases by the number of values in that instruction. *However*, if the instruction modifies the instruction pointer, that value is used and the instruction pointer is *not automatically increased*.

### Day 7 Task

The provided intcode program will ask for a $\text{phase setting}\in[0,4]$. There are exactly 5 amplifiers, each of which has a distinct phase setting.

Then it will ask for an $\text{input signal}$ which is either `0` or the output of a previously run amplifier.

**Find the largest output signal by trying every possible combination of phase settings on the amplifiers**. The phase setting is the only thing that distinguishes the amplifiers on the hardware level.

Make sure that memory is not shared or reused between copies of the program.

The actual input file is the amplifier software.

### Day 7 Approach

We need to cover all permutations of `0,1,2,3,4`. Those 120 attempts can be split into multiple threads. But the multithreading libraries "Lua Lanes" and "lua-llthreads" both fail building in cygwin.

The intcode computer is technically the same as in day 5. I can port that to lua and the only thing that needs modification is the `perform_store_input` function. It needs to be able to pass in a sequence instead of just always the same constant.