COM is stationary and orbits nothing. Everything else *orbits* exactly one other thing.

### Task

Verify that the map is correct by computing the total number of direct orbits and indirect orbits. What is the total number of (direct or indirect) orbits?

If `COM-A-B-C` then `COM:0`, `A:1`, `B:2`, `C:3` because C has three steps to COM.

### Format

The input consists of `N` lines of the form `[A-Z0-9]{3}\)[A-Z0-9{3}]` .

I guess there might be circles or repetitions? Probably there are no circles, because the question is about the total number of orbits in the data, not about only those connected to COM. And infinity would be undefined.

### Approach 1

```
        G - H       J - K - L
       /           /
COM - B - C - D - E - F
               \
                I
```

We could start by enumerating from COM outwards, always giving the next entry a number one higher. And then sum up all numbers.

That would require to first build the tree. That means for every entry we'd have to find its parent (which it orbits). With a bidirectionally linked list, that should be doable in $\mathcal{O}(n)$. But since we have to search this way for every entry, it's $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. And we'd have to track the data also in $\mathcal{O}(n)$.

Combining the two, though that is an unrigorous estimate, gives a total complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$.

### Approach 2

Alternatively, we could start by going through the input and taking note of everything orbiting COM, then go through the whole input again and take note of everything orbiting things in that set. Continue to do so until nothing is found anymore that orbits the latest step.

Memory-wise, that would also be a worst case of $\mathcal{O}(n)$, but the average memory usage should be lower than Approach 1. Because memory usage is $\mathcal{O}(w)$ with $w$ being the tree width.

Performance-wise, that would be $\mathcal{O}(n*k)$ with $k$ being the tree depth. That means it's somewhere between $\mathcal{O}(n*log(n))$ and $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$.

Since $w*k\approx n$, we have thus a total complexity of approximately $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. So this approach is not better in time complexity, but it feels like it's better in the average case.

Because with this approach I don't have to code a data structure for the tree, I'll go with that one.

### Pseudocode

```
def read_whole_input(current_orbitee_set):
    orbit_count = 0
    next_orbitee_set = {}
    for line in input:
        if line != previous_line
          and line.orbitee in current_orbitee_set:
            next_orbitee_set.add(line.satellite)
            orbit_count++
    return (orbit_count, next_orbitee_set)

def main():
    count = 0
    step = 1
    current_orbitee_set = COM
    while current_orbitee_set not empty:
        (c, d) = read_whole_input(current_orbitee_set)
        count += c * step
        step += 1
        current_orbitee_set = d
    return count
```



