COM is stationary and orbits nothing. Everything else *orbits* exactly one other thing.

## Part 1

### Task

Verify that the map is correct by computing the total number of direct orbits and indirect orbits. What is the total number of (direct or indirect) orbits?

If `COM-A-B-C` then `COM:0`, `A:1`, `B:2`, `C:3` because C has three steps to COM.

### Format

The input consists of `N` lines of the form `[A-Z0-9]{3}\)[A-Z0-9{3}]` .

I guess there might be circles or repetitions? Probably there are no circles, because the question is about the total number of orbits in the data, not about only those connected to COM. And infinity would be undefined.

### Approach 1

```
        G - H       J - K - L
       /           /
COM - B - C - D - E - F
               \
                I
```

We could start by enumerating from COM outwards, always giving the next entry a number one higher. And then sum up all numbers.

That would require to first build the tree. That means for every entry we'd have to find its parent (which it orbits). With a bidirectionally linked list, that should be doable in $\mathcal{O}(n)$. But since we have to search this way for every entry, it's $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. And we'd have to track the data also in $\mathcal{O}(n)$.

Combining the two, though that is an unrigorous estimate, gives a total complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$.

### Approach 2

Alternatively, we could start by going through the input and taking note of everything orbiting COM, then go through the whole input again and take note of everything orbiting things in that set. Continue to do so until nothing is found anymore that orbits the latest step.

Memory-wise, that would also be a worst case of $\mathcal{O}(n)$, but the average memory usage should be lower than Approach 1. Because memory usage is $\mathcal{O}(w)$ with $w$ being the tree width.

Performance-wise, that would be $\mathcal{O}(n*k)$ with $k$ being the tree depth. That means it's somewhere between $\mathcal{O}(n*log(n))$ and $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$.

Since $w*k\approx n$, we have thus a total complexity of approximately $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. So this approach is not better in time complexity, but it feels like it's better in the average case.

Because with this approach I don't have to code a data structure for the tree, I'll go with that one.

### Pseudocode

```
def read_whole_input(current_orbitee_set):
    orbit_count = 0
    next_orbitee_set = {}
    for line in input:
        if line != previous_line
          and line.orbitee in current_orbitee_set:
            next_orbitee_set.add(line.satellite)
            orbit_count++
    return (orbit_count, next_orbitee_set)

def main():
    count = 0
    step = 1
    current_orbitee_set = COM
    while current_orbitee_set not empty:
        (c, d) = read_whole_input(current_orbitee_set)
        count += c * step
        step += 1
        current_orbitee_set = d
    return count
```

## Part 2

> An orbital transfer lets you move from any object to an object orbiting or orbited by that object.
> Now, you just need to figure out how many *orbital transfers* you (`YOU`) need to take to get to Santa (`SAN`).
>
> *What is the minimum number of orbital transfers required*?

As we established in Part1, cycles are not possible.

### Approach 1

List the Path from COM to SAN and from COM to YOU.
Find the last entry that both have in common. Count the remaining orbitees and add them up.

E.g. `COM,A,B,C,SAN` and `COM,A,B,D,YOU` would give `YOU->D->B->C->SAN`. Don't count `SAN` and don't count `YOU`, but do count `B` once. That gives `1+lenA+lenB = 1+1+ = 3`.

This approach is similar to Part 2. Because it needs to build the paths in the same way, it's $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$. The path checking is linear.

The difference to Part1 is that we need to store some path information because we need to know which entries are still on both paths.

### Approach 2

Start from SAN and from YOU simultaneously, growing outward, hence we only have to store the pathes that are leading to SAN and YOU instead of every branch. Since every entry has only one parent, it's clear in which direction to wander.. but the two seekers are not necessarily at the same time in the middle. In order to realize when they meet, we need to store all the visited entries and in order to compute the distance, we should also store the distance directly with them.

Because cycles are not possible, there will only one starting entry for SAN and one for YOU.

### Pseudocode

```
# step counter
step = 0

do
    # make one step
    santas_orbitee = grep -f input1.txt ')SAN$'
    your_orbitee = grep -f input1.txt ')SAN$'
    step += 1

    # store the step number for easy retrieval later
    santas_orbitees[$santas_orbitee]=$step
    your_orbitees[$your_orbitee]=$step

	match = entries_matching(santas_orbitees, your_orbitees, $santas_orbitee, $your_orbitee)
while match == ""

# subtract the step SAN->A and YOU->B. And only count the meeting point once. But because we are actually counting not points, but connections, the only way we would have counted the meeting point twice is if both branches had met before. So that subtraction is not needed.
num_steps_needed = santas_orbitees[$match] + your_orbitees[$match] - 2
echo "$num_steps_needed"



# returns the empty string if no match found yet. Otherwise returns the entry that lies in both.
def entries_matching(santas_orbitees, your_orbitees, latest_santa, latest_you):
	# we only need to check the lastest addition, because anything else has been checked last turn
	if [ your_orbitees[$latest_santa] ]
		return $latest_santa
	if [ santas_orbitees[$latest_you] ]
		return $latest_you
	return ""
	
```

